# Non-Intuitive Topics

While a lot of things in electronics aren't particularly confusing, there's a
few topics which I've found historically just a bit surprising and
non-intuitive.


## Conventional Current Flow v Reality

One thing that trips some people up---largely because you can ignore it until
you can't---is the difference between reality and "classical" current flow. This
confusion can all be laid at the feet of one man: [Benjamin
Franklin](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Benjamin_Franklin). When Franklin
performed his famous kite experiment, thereby proving that lightning was
electricity, the general concept of electricity was that it was some kind of
"fluid". Franklin, understandably, surmised that the electrical flow proceeded
from positive to negative. This idea was accepted, and it became the
conventional view.

Today we call this the _conventional current flow_ model, and in it, current
flows from a more positive voltage to a less positive voltage. This all predates
the modern (Rutherford, 1911) model of electrons, neutrons, and protons. Now we
know that an electron is the charge carrier and that electrons travel in the
reverse direction. Franklin was wrong. Electrons move from a lower potential to
a higher potential. This is termed the _model electron flow_.

For most work, you can simply use the conventional flow and everything will be
fine. It's probably easier to understand for most people. There are times,
generally when thinking deeply about semiconductors, where electron flow is more
easy to understand. If someone doesn't talk about what model they are using,
99.999% of the time they are using the historic conventional current flow
model.

If you want to read more, [this
article](https://workforce.libretexts.org/Bookshelves/Electronics_Technology/Book%3A_Electric_Circuits_III_-_Semiconductors_(Kuphaldt)/02%3A_Solid-state_Device_Theory/2.05%3A_Electrons_and_%E2%80%9Choles%E2%80%99%E2%80%99)
might help.