# Random Tips & Tricks

These are just some super simple "random tricks" I've accumulated over
the years. A lot of them have come from other people and places, so I'll
try and make sure I credit their source. Sorry for the laundry list
approach right now.

## Tool Usage

* Where did that signal go? Sometimes you will ‘lose’ a signal on your
  oscilloscope and it may seem like it’s floating off the screen. You
  might have a large DC offset. Switch to AC coupling to remove it, and
  that should bring things around ground level. [Adafruit]

## Circuit Design

* To reduce the EMI and circuit noise generated by brushed motors, you
  can solder a 10nF ceramic capacitor between the motor terminal and the
  metal housing. [Adafruit]
* Lazy libraries – It can be tempting to save time by downloading other
  people’s Eagle libraries. But you would be amazed at how often they
  contain footprint errors and poor schematic symbols. Learning to make
  your own libraries will pay off in the long run. [Adafruit]
* Ferrites are a great way to filter out high frequency noise (above
  10MHz), which can also reduce EMI enormously. You should use more of
  them.

## Parts Management

* If, like me, you keep a lot of your SMD components in
  [AideTek](https://aidetek.com/) cases, that also means removing
  passives from tape (annoying in and of itself). I use [these
  3D-printed sorting
  containers](https://www.printables.com/model/114308-sorting-tray-with-funnel)
  and I learned that if you spray them with an [anti-static spray
  cleaner](../tools/consumables.md#anti-static-cleaning-spray) it keeps
  the small (< 1206) components from statically attaching themselves to
  the sorting container. Spray it, then wait a few minutes before wiping
  it all off with a paper towel or other wipe.