# Hand Tools

## General Guidance

My general guidance is that you should buy an inexpensive/cheap tool to start,
and upgrade once you've figured out 1) whether you would use it enough; 2) what
you value in the tool. Yes, there is often huge differences between cheap and
expensive tools, but it may not matter for your purposes. I call this the Harbor
Freight Rule. You don't buy a $700 Snap On bearing puller to do it once.

What I've included in here are the tools that I _personally_ like. Some are
super cheap, and some aren't.

## Soldering

### Soldering Iron/Station

My soldering iron of choice is a (10 year old?) Hakko FX-888 (analog). A while
back they converted to the [FX-888D digital
version](https://hakkousa.com/fx-888d), and I'm sure it's equally good. Hakko is
one of the big makers of soldering equipment, and their equipment is very well
regarded. I like the FX-888 because it's small, and heats up quickly.

I have a few recommendations, though, if you're considering buying a soldering
iron/station:

1. You absolutely, positively must have accurate temperature control. Super
   cheap irons just don't have that control which can lead to poor soldering,
   terrible user experience, and potentially damaged components.
2. Stick to one of the well known manufacturers. There's a lot of
   random-string-of-letters named companies on Amazon peddling knock offs, and
   some are probably fine, and a lot are not. When I say "well known", I'd list
   Hakko, Weller, JBC, Metcal, or Edsyn. Not only are they better made, but they
   (and the entire ecosystem) will be supported for decades. I can easily buy
   T18 tips for my Hakko from dozens of places.
3. Soldering stations (meant to be in a single location) tend to be better bang
   for buck than a soldering pen (like the well regarded
   [TS-80P](https://www.adafruit.com/product/4244)). All that additional
   complexity cost money. Unless you need to be able to throw it in your
   backpack, it's not really the best trade off.
4. Don't overspend. Yes, get a decent brand, but you don't need a $3,000 JBC
   workstation.

NOTE: You might not need a soldering iron. There are a lot of ecosystems, like
[STEMMA
QT](https://learn.adafruit.com/introducing-adafruit-stemma-qt/what-is-stemma-qt),
which don't require soldering to connect things together.

### Desoldering Tool and Solder Wick

It doesn't matter how good you get, you'll always make mistakes. It just
happens. Being able to clean up and correct them is critical, and there's two
things you can use to remove solder:

* "Solder suckers". These are spring-loaded little tubes that will suck the
  solder off the PCB or wire. They have big brothers that use vacuum pumps to do
  the same thing, but those are _very_ expensive.
* Solder wick. This is basically super-fine copper braided together and then
  with a coating of flux and other materials to help remove solder.

Which one should you get? I would get one of each. Solder wick is cheap, but
it's single use and a consumable. For a solder sucker, I absolutely swear by the
original Edsyn [Soldapullt](https://www.edsyn.com/product/DHT/DS017.html) (I
actually have the [Silverstat](https://www.edsyn.com/product/AS196.html) model I
got on clearance from [TEquipment](https://www.tequipment.net/)). 

For solder wick, like solder and flux, I would recommend sticking with one of
the big names: Multicore, MG Chemicals, or Chip Quik. My luck with cheap little
ones I've gotten off AliExpress and elsewhere is... disappointing. 

WARNING: Be careful when using solder wick. You are holding copper braid, and
copper loves nothing so much as to transfer heat ... quickly. 

## Screwdrivers

You're going to need screwdrivers, either to put things together, or pull them
apart. They're also insanely useful for a bunch of things where it might not be
their design intent. They come in a few categories that I'll cover: normal,
micro, and insulated. This advice is for makers, and not mechanics. I wouldn't
necessarily always make the same choices of tools to work on a car or furnace as
I would for smaller things.

NOTE: **So Many Choice** There are, quite literally, hundreds of types of screw
heads out in the world. You can see a list of some of the most popular
[here](https://resources.tannerbolt.com/articles/what-type-of-screw-is-this).

## Normal

This is your run-of-the-mill everyday screwdriver. It's not unreasonable to just
buy a random set that has a selection of both Phillips and the accursed slotted
screwdrivers. These are a pair from the nicest ones I own:

![Wera Kraftform screwdrivers](/img/handtool-wera-screwdriver-kraftform.jpg)

They're [Wera Kraftform](https://www-us.wera.de/en/great-tools/kraftform/), and
they're my favorite because they're insanely comfortable, strong, and still
quite light. I bought them as part of a
[kit](https://products.wera.de/en/screwdrivers_kraftform_plus__series_300_334_sk_6.html)
that came with a nice little rack to hold them. There's tons of good brands you
can buy besides Wera. A few are: Craftsman (yes, the old Sears brand), Cobolt,
Klein, Wiha, Gearwrench, Knipex, Bosch, Swiss, and Tekton. You can find a couple
of [interesting reviews](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xtZ2jh_J7XE) [on
Youtube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=845HUaWYSQA).

Personally, I don't like the multi-tip screwdrivers for my main screwdrivers.
That's different for the micro side of the screwdriver world. Find 2-3 of each
type (Phillips and slotted), and that'll be fine for a long time.


## Micro

Electronics are full of tiny little screws and bolts. To deal with them, you
have a couple options. You can pick up a set of dozens and dozens of tiny
screwdrivers ([Wera makes a lovely one, but
pricey](https://products.wera.de/en/screwdrivers_series_kraftform_micro_kraftform_micro_big_pack_1.html)).

The other option is to pick up one of many "kits" that have a ton of bits and a
holder or two. It might have other things with it as well. I'd say [iFixit has
the best value](https://www.ifixit.com/Store/Tools/Pro-Tech-Toolkit/IF145-307)
for that. This is the one I've had for 15+ years:

![Wiha multi-bit precision set](/img/handtool-wiha-micro-screwdriver-set.jpg)

For most people, the multi-bit set is the way to go.

## Insulated

Insulated screwdrivers come in two forms: ones for high-voltage, and ones for
fine adjustment of electronic components. The first, for high-voltage, are
typically rated to 1,000V, and are heavily insulated for both the handle and the
shaft to protect against shock from accidental contact with live circuits. They
come in single items, but also in interchangeable sets. Sets seem to always use
square mechanisms to join. I picked up a relatively [cheap set on
AliExpress](https://www.aliexpress.us/item/3256805090334720.html) a while back:

![Electrically insulated screwdrivers](/img/handtool-syeeth-screwdriver-set.jpg)

Ceramic-tipped screwdrivers for adjusting sensitive electronic components such
as capacitors and resistors. They are completely non-conductive and non-magnetic
so there's zero risk of short-circuiting, creating magnetic interference, or
[capacitively coupling](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Capacitive_coupling) with
something. They also won't mar or scratch components, but they're quite brittle
so don't use them for tightening screws. This is a super cheap one I picked up
from Amazon (just search ceramic screwdriver):

![Ceramic screwdriver](/img/handtool-ceramic-screwdriver.jpg)

## Pliers

### Needle Nose

I actually have two different needle nose pliers for work. First is a [Xcelite
378M]():

![Xcelite 378M](/img/handtool-xcelite-378m.jpg)

And the other is a [Xuron 450](), which has a _very fine_ point:

![Xuron 450](/img/handtool-xuron-450.jpg)
### Long Nose

### Combination

Like their name suggests, these are for a combination of uses. They're great for
general gripping of things, and typically have a curved area for round material.
They also have a passable cutter. Just an all-around tools.
[Mine](https://www.wihatools.com/products/soft-grip-combination-pliers-7) cam as
part of a
[set](https://www.wihatools.com/products/soft-grip-pliers-cutters-3-piece-set).

![Wiha 32606 combination pliers](/img/handtool-wiha-combination-pliers-32606.jpg)

### Lead Forming Tool

These fall into a category that, quite honestly, you don't need until you do
need them, so you can generally just skip them. I cover them here because 1)
they're neat; 2) it's good to know they exist. Lead forming pliers is designed
to create spacing/stand-off crimps in a wire or component lead. The ones I have
are the [Xuron 573L](https://xuron.com/index.php/main/consumer_products/7/57),
which look like this:

![Xuron 563L lead forming tool](/img/handtool-xuron-573l.jpg)

What makes them special is the head on them:

![Xuron 563L close-up](/img/handtool-xuron-573l-closeup.jpg)

As you'll see, there's actually a bunch of moving pieces. When you put a wire in
them, and close them, you get something like this:

![Xuron 563L result](/img/handtool-xuron-573l-result.jpg)

So what good is this, you might ask? It's good for creating stand-offs between a
component and a board, for example. Or ensuring a wire can't go through a hole
easily. As I said, you don't need them until you need them.

## Cutters

Sometimes you need to make one thing become two things, and that's where cutters
come in.

### Side Flush Cutters (Shears)

You _absolutely must own these_. No exceptions. They will become your favorite
cutters, and they will be with you forever.  What's a side flush cutter? It's a
small cutter which is designed to cut _flush_ against a surface. Think trimming
leads after soldering. But you can use it for just about any cutting needs, even
[hogging out](https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/hog%20out) material
from a 3D print. It's not a bad idea to have a couple sets. This the main ones I
use, [Xuron 170-II](https://xuron.com/index.php/main/industrial_products/11/10]
are super sharp.

![Xuron 170-II](/img/handtool-xuron-170-2.jpg)

You can see how flat and sharp the blade is, even after several years of use:

![Xuron 170-II close-up](/img/handtool-xuron-170-2-closeup.jpg)

I would pick up at least 2 of them. The big thing you can't do with them is cut
any really thick or hardened wire. For that, you'll need diagonal cutters.

### Diagonal Cutters

These are a super all-around cutter for just about any material. They tend to be
hardened by the manufacturer, and can cut a lot of different materials. They
also have a longer handle, which gives you more leverage when cutting things. I
picked up
[mine](https://www.wihatools.com/products/soft-grip-diagonal-cutters-6-3), along
with some pliers) as part of a [set from
Wiha](https://www.wihatools.com/products/soft-grip-pliers-cutters-3-piece-set):

![Wiha 32642 diagonal cutters](/img/handtool-wiha-diagonal-cutters-32642.jpg)

You can get something cheaper, and my recommendation would be to drop by your
local hardware store for these and just see what feels good in your hand and to
your wallet.


## Tweezers

When working with electronics, we work with a lot of small things. Small things
need tweezers, and these are mine:

![Tweezers, straight, bent, and ceramic](/img/handtool-tweezers.jpg)

From the top, you have some with bent tips for placing things like SMD parts.
The needle sharp middle pair are great from pulling things out of connectors,
etc. And finally, the bottom set have a ceramic tip, which means they are 100%
non magnetic, and non-reactive. Try picking up a small magnet with normal ones.

I don't recall where I got them, quite honestly, but to start, you can just pick
up a small set of ESD-safe (probably!) tweezers from your favorite retailer.
Note the type on the handle (ESD-15 and ESD-16). These are somewhat standardized
industry shapes, so you can search for those if you want something similar.


## Wire Strippers and Crimpers